<!--- Please keep the craydate crate root's comment and README.md in sync. -->

# Craydate

This crate and its related crates together provide a safe Rust API for the
[Playdate](https://play.date/) hand held gaming system.

The name is crustacean pun, with our dear friends the crayfish.

# Requirements
Using these crates requires the [Playdate SDK](https://play.date/dev/), which has [its own
license](https://play.date/dev/sdk-license). Install the SDK and add an environment variable
named `PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH` that points to the directory where you installed it, such as
`PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH=C:\playdate`.

This crate uses unstable features in order to provide a `#![no_std]` library and application to
run on the Playdate simulator and hardware devices. Thus it requires use of the [Rust nightly
compiler](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.2.0/book/nightly-rust.html).

# Getting Started

Building a `#![no_std]` application that is compiled for the Playdate simulator requires a bit
of extra Cargo setup, which we try to make easy for you. The dependency structure of your
project will look like this:

```
- your-game-project**
  ├── [dependencies] your-game** (`#![no_std]` crate)
  |   ├── [dependencies] craydate (`#![no_std]` crate)
  |   └── [dependencies] euclid (with `default-features = false` and `features = ["libm"]`)
  └── [build-dependencies] craydate-build

** = is specific to your game and provided by the game developer.
```

Note that your game's crate must include the `#![no_std]` directive in its crate root in order
to build for the Playdate device.

The `euclid` crate is used in the craydate public Apis, which is why you will need it. The
features listed above are specified to make the crate compatible with a `#![no_std]`
application.

If you choose not to use the root project crate talked about below, then you do not need the
[craydate-build](TODO: link) in `[build-dependencies]`, but will be responsible to build the pdx
image and install it yourself.

## The root project crate

We provide an template of a root project crate at [craydate-project](TODO: link), which will act
as the coordination point to build your game for the Playdate simulator and the Playdate device.
To use it, please rename and customize it for your game.

To start using it, download the latest release, unzip it and edit it as follows. See below for
more details.
1. Ensure your `PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH` environment variable is set to the location of the Playdate
   SDK.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, change the `name` to include your game's name, such as
   `foo-project` for the game crate `foo`.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, change the `game` dependency's `package` and `path` to point to
   your game's crate.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, remove or change the `game-assets` dependency's `package` and
   `path` to point to your game's asset-generating crate (when you have one, you can comment it
   out with a `#` for now).
1. If you kept the `game-assets` dependency for generating assets, uncomment and fix the call to
   it from `src/bin/make_pdx.rs` (when you have one, you can ignore this for now).

### Development Workflow

To build your game for the Playdate simulator, simply build your customized root project
`your-game-project` crate with the Cargo `--lib` flag, which will build your game as a
dependency.

After building the game, the root project crate (if based on [craydate-project](TODO: link))
includes 2 binaries to help you get it onto the Playdate simulator or a hardware device. Build
them by building your root project `your-game-project` crate with the Cargo `--bins` flag. The
binaries are:
* make_pdx
* run_simulator

#### make_pdx
Combines your built game, along with any asset files into a pdx image for the device or
simulator.

The `your-game-assets` dependency seen above is an optional place to construct and collect
assets for your game that will be included by **make_pdx** when building the game's pdx image.
To do so, edit the `make_pdx.rs` file to call `your-game-assets`. Assets should be collected
into `env!("PDX_SOURCE_DIR")`. For example:
```rs
  your_game_assets::generate_assets(env!("PDX_SOURCE_DIR"))?;
```

The **make_pdx** binary would then include those assets into your game's pdx image.

#### run_simulator

Runs the Playdate simulator, loading the pdx image generated by **make_pdx**.

#### VSCode

We provide configurations for VSCode in the template root project [craydate-project](TODO: link)
to build and use the make_pdx and run_simulator binaries correctly. The `.vscode/settings.json`
file configures these tasks. You should not need to change the configuration unless you move the
.vscode directory out of the root project crate.
* The `"projectRootCrate"` variable should point to the root project crate. By default, since
  the `.vscode` directory is inside that crate, it is `"."`.
* The `"rust-analyzer.linkedProjects"` variable should point to the root project crate's
  `Cargo.toml` file. By default it is `"./Cargo.toml"`.

When running the simulator with this task, VSCode will capture the `stdout` and `stderr` output
of the game and write it to a file called `stdout.txt`.

### Panics

The `Cargo.toml` for the root project crate must also set `panic = "abort"`. This is included in
the template root project [craydate-project](TODO: link) crate:
```
[profile.dev]
panic = "abort"
[profile.release]
panic = "abort"
```
Otherwise you will get a compilation error:
```
error: language item required, but not found: `eh_personality`
  |
  = note: this can occur when a binary crate with `#![no_std]` is compiled for a target where `eh_personality` is defined in the standard library
```

## Your first game

Your game's crate must include a function that will be called after the Playdate system
initializes. This function should contain your game's main game loop. It's simplest form would
look like:
```rs
#[craydate::main]
async fn main(api: craydate::Api) -> ! {
  let events = api.system.system_event_watcher();
  loop {
    match events.next().await {
      craydate::SystemEvent::NextFrame { inputs, .. } => {
        // Read inputs, update game state and draw.
      }
      _ => (),
    }
  }
}
```
Then, handle the various events that can be returned from `next()`. In particular, handle input,
update game state, and draw to the screen when the `SystemEvent::NextFrame` event happens. You
can access the Playdate device through the `craydate::Api` parameter to `main()`.

Logging to the Playdate simulator's console, for debugging, is possible through the
`craydate::log()` and `craydate::log_error()` functions.

# Platforms

**Currently the craydate project only supports development for the Windows simulator.** We will
expand support to the Playdate hardware device once we get access to one. Simulators on other
platforms (e.g. Mac) are possible, and would only need changes to the root project crate.

* The "osx.craydateHostTarget" setting may need to change if you're working on an ARM-based mac.
* The "linux.craydateHostTarget" setting hasn't been tested to see if it's correct.
* A MacOSX simulator build has not been tested and may not link.
* A Linux simulator build has not been tested and may not link.
* There's no VSCode task to install the pdx on a Playdate device yet.
* The build for a Playdate device has not been tested yet and may not load at all.

# License
This project is licensed under either of

* Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
* MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution
Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in
Craydate by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be dual licensed as above, without
any additional terms or conditions.