<!--- Please keep the playdate crate root's comment and README.md in sync. -->

# Playdate

This crate and its related crates together provide a safe Rust API for the
[Playdate](https://play.date/) hand held gaming system.

# Requirements
Using these crates requires the [Playdate SDK](https://play.date/dev/), which has [its own
license](https://play.date/dev/sdk-license). Install the SDK and add an environment variable
named `PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH` that points to the directory where you installed it, such as
`PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH=C:\playdate`.

This crate uses unstable features in order to provide a `#![no_std]` library and application to
run on the Playdate simulator and hardware devices. Thus it requires use of the [Rust nightly
compiler](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.2.0/book/nightly-rust.html).

# Getting Started

Building a `#![no_std]` application that is compiled for the Playdate simulator requires a bit
of extra work and Cargo setup. The dependency structure of your project will look like this:

```
- your-game-project**
  ├── [dependencies] your-game** (`#![no_std]` crate)
  |   ├── [dependencies] playdate (`#![no_std]` crate)
  |   └── [dependencies] euclid (with `default-features = false` to keep it compatible with `#![no_std]`) (used in the playdate API)
  └── [build-dependencies] playdate-build

** = is specific to your game and provided by the game developer.
```

Note that your game's crate must include the `#![no_std]` directive in its crate root in order
to build for the Playdate device.

## The root project crate

We provide an template root project crate at [playdate-project](TODO: link), which will act as
the coordination point to build your game for the Playdate simulator and the Playdate device. To
use it, please rename and customize it for your game.

To start using it, download the latest release, unzip it and edit it as follows. See below for
more details:
1. Ensure your `PLAYDATE_SDK_PATH` environment variable is set to the location of the Playdate
   SDK.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, change the `name` to include your game's name.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, change the `game` dependency's `package` and `path` to point to
   your game's crate.
1. In the `Cargo.toml` file, remove or change the `game-assets` dependency's `package` and
   `path` to point to your game's asset-generating crate.
1. If you kept the `game-assets` dependency for generating assets, call it from
   `src/bin/make_pdx.rs`.

If you choose not to use the template crate, then you do not need the [playdate-build](TODO:
link) crate listed in `[build-dependencies]`.

### Development Workflow

To build your game for the Playdate simulator, simply build your customized root project
`your-game-project` crate with the Cargo `--lib` flag, which will build your game as a
dependency.

After building the game, the root project crate (if based on [playdate-project](TODO: link))
includes 2 binaries to help you get it onto the Playdate simulator or a hardware device. Build
them by building your root project `your-game-project` crate with the Cargo `--bins` flag. The
binaries are:
* make_pdx
* run_simulator

#### make_pdx
Combines your built game, along with any asset files into a pdx image for the device or
simulator, which is found in `$OUT_DIR/pdx_out`.

The `your-game-assets` dependency seen above is an optional place to construct and collect
assets for your game that will be included by **make_pdx** when building the game's pdx image.
To do so, edit the `make_pdx.rs` file to call `your-game-assets`. Assets should be collected
into `env!("PDX_SOURCE_DIR")`. For example:
```rs
  your_game_assets::generate_assets(env!("PDX_SOURCE_DIR"))?;
```

The **make_pdx** binary would then include those assets into your game's pdx image.

#### run_simulator

Runs the Playdate simulator, loading the pdx image generated by **make_pdx**.

#### VSCode

If you're using VSCode, the template root project [playdate-project](TODO: link) crate comes
with two files to provide tasks that build your game's pdx image and run it on the Windows
simulator.
* `.vscode/settings.json`: The `"projectRootCrate"` variable should point to the root project
  crate. By default, since the `.vscode` directory is inside that crate, it is `"."`. Similarly,
  the `"rust-analyzer.linkedProjects"` variable should point to the root project crate's
  `Cargo.toml` file. By default it is `"./Cargo.toml"`.
* `.vscode/tasks.json`: Provides the tasks to build a pdx for the Playdate simulator, and to
  load it into the simulator, or to build a pdx for the Playdate device.

When running the simulator with this task, VSCode will capture the `stdout` and `stderr` output
of the game and write it to a file called `stdout.txt`.

### Panics

The `Cargo.toml` for the root project crate must also set `panic = "abort"`. This is included in
the template root project [playdate-project](TODO: link) crate:
```
[profile.dev]
panic = "abort"
[profile.release]
panic = "abort"
```
Otherwise you will get a compilation error:
```
error: language item required, but not found: `eh_personality`
  |
  = note: this can occur when a binary crate with `#![no_std]` is compiled for a target where `eh_personality` is defined in the standard library
```

## Your first game

Your game's crate must include a function that will be called after the Playdate system
initializes. This function should contain your game's main game loop. It's simplest form would
look like:
```rs
#[playdate::main]
async fn main(api: playdate::Api) -> ! {
  let events = api.system.system_event_watcher();
  loop {
    match events.next().await {
      playdate::SystemEvent::NextFrame { inputs, .. } => {
        // Read inputs, update game state and draw.
      }
      _ => (),
    }
  }
}
```
Then, handle the various events that can be returned from `next()`. In particular, handle input,
update game state, and draw to the screen when the `SystemEvent::NextFrame` event happens. The
Playdate system APIs are available throught the `playdate::Api` parameter to `main()`.

Logging to the simulator's console for debugging is possible through the `playdate::log()` and
`playdate::log_error()` functions.

# Platforms

**Currently this project only supports development for the Windows simulator.** We will expand
support to the Playdate hardware device once we get access to one. Simulators on other platforms
(e.g. Mac) are possible, and would only need changes to the root project crate.

# License
This project is licensed under either of

* Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
* MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution
Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in
playdate by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be dual licensed as above, without
any additional terms or conditions.